toc: add sql optimization-related docs (#4219)
pingcap/docs: explain-overview.md

> # `EXPLAIN` Overview

Reviewer: Because this is an `overview`, would it be better if we add links to the `EXPLAIN` series in this doc and explain a little bit about the series?

Author: Done.

> Because SQL is a declarative language, it describes what the results of a query should look like, **not the methodology** to actually retrieve those results. TiDB considers all the possible ways in which a query could be executed, including using what order to join tables and whether any potential indexes can be used. The process of _considering query execution plans_ is known as SQL optimization.

Reviewer: Can we change another description? 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/41534398/102179166-aa42cb80-3ee1-11eb-9904-f4e201ad66c3.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/41534398/102179230-c21a4f80-3ee1-11eb-8e31-85503051269f.png)
Looks like it's quite duplicated.

Author: It was intentional to duplicate but cover different perspectives. The SQL Tuning is high level and does not mention EXPLAIN yet. This is a key concept: a lot of naive users believe you can look at a query and tell if its efficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL is a declarative language. It describes what the results of a query should look like, **not the methodology** to actually retrieve those results. TiDB considers all the possible ways in which a query could be executed, including using what order to join tables and whether any potential indexes can be used. The process of _considering query execution plans_ is known as SQL optimization.
```

- For more information about each column of `EXPLAIN`, see [`EXPLAIN` Output Format](/sql-statements/sql-statement-explain.md).

The results of `EXPLAIN` shed light on how to index the data tables so that the execution plan can use the index to speed up the execution of SQL statements. You can also use `EXPLAIN` to check if the optimizer chooses the optimal order to join tables.

## Operator execution order

The execution plan in TiDB has a tree structure, with each node of the tree as an operator. Considering the concurrent execution of multiple threads in each operator, all operators consume CPU and memory resources to process data during the execution of a SQL statement. From this point of view, there is no execution order for the operator.

However, from the perspective of which operators process a row of data first, the execution of a piece of data is in order. The following rule roughly summarizes this order:

**`Build` is always executed before `Probe` and always appears before `Probe`.**

> The first half of this rule means: if an operator has multiple child nodes, the operator with the `Build` keyword at the end of the child node ID is always executed before the operator with the `Probe` keyword. The second half means: when TiDB shows the execution plan, the `Build` side always appears first, followed by the `Probe` side.

Reviewer: Has the `EXPLAIN` series covered this content?

Author: Yes.

> - It is recommended to compare data of the same type; otherwise, additional `cast` operations are introduced, which causes the index to be unavailable. For example, regarding the condition `user_id = 123456`, if `user_id` is a string, you must define `123456` as a string constant.

You can also use `AND` (intersection) and `OR` (union) to combine the range query conditions of one column. For a multi-dimensional composite index, you can use conditions in multiple columns. For example, regarding the composite index `(a, b, c)`:

- When `a` is an equivalent query, continue to figure out the query range of `b`; when `b` is also an equivalent query, continue to figure out the query range of `c`.
- Otherwise, if `a` is a non-equivalent query, you can only figure out the range of `a`.

## Operator overview

Different operators output different information after the `EXPLAIN` statement is executed. This section focuses on the execution plan of different operators, ranging from table scans, table aggregation, to table join.

> You can use optimizer hints to control the behavior of the optimizer, and thereby controlling the selection of the physical operators. For example, `/*+ HASH_JOIN(t1, t2) */` means that the optimizer uses the `Hash Join` algorithm. For more details, see [Optimizer Hints](/optimizer-hints.md).

Reviewer: Has the `EXPLAIN` series covered this content? Or this can just be removed?

Author: Yes

Reviewer: I searched this branch but found no description related to range query

Author: I have added this back under example operators.

- **TableFullScan**: Full table scan.
- **TableRangeScan**: Table scans with the specified range.
- **TableRowIDScan**: Accurately scans the table data based on the RowID passed down from the upper layer.
- **IndexFullScan**: Another type of "full table scan", except that the index data is scanned, rather than the table data.
- **IndexRangeScan**: Index scans with the specified range.

TiDB aggregates the data or calculation results scanned from TiKV/TiFlash. The data aggregation operators can be divided into the following categories:

- **TableReader**: Aggregates the data obtained by the underlying operators like `TableFullScan` or `TableRangeScan` in TiKV.
- **IndexReader**: Aggregates the data obtained by the underlying operators like `IndexFullScan` or `IndexRangeScan` in TiKV.
- **IndexLookUp**: First aggregates the RowID (in TiKV) scanned by the `Build` side. Then at the `Probe` side, accurately reads the data from TiKV based on these RowIDs. At the `Build` side, there are operators like `IndexFullScan` or `IndexRangeScan`; at the `Probe` side, there is the `TableRowIDScan` operator.

> - **IndexMerge**: Similar to `IndexLookUp`. `IndexMerge` can be seen as an extension of `IndexLookupReader`. `IndexMerge` supports reading multiple indexes at the same time. There are many `Build`s and one `Probe`. The execution process of `IndexMerge` the same as that of `IndexLookUp`.

Reviewer: The `EXPLAIN` series mention these operators but have not explained what these operators are. The readers might get confused about new terms unexplained.

Author: I have added these back as examples operators.

> * `id` describes the name of an operator, or sub-task that is required to execute the SQL statement. While the structure appears as a tree, executing the query does not strictly require the child nodes to be completed before the parent nodes. TiDB supports intra-query parallelism, so a more accurate way to describe the execution flow is that the child nodes _feed into_ their parent nodes. Parent, child and sibling operators _might_ potentially be executing parts of the query in parallel.

Author: It could also say "flows into" or "provides data to the parent node" or "delivers data to the parent node".

flows is the most accurate because it implies streaming.

> * `id` describes the name of an operator, or sub-task that is required to execute the SQL statement. While the structure appears as a tree, executing the query does not strictly require the child nodes to be completed before the parent nodes. TiDB supports intra-query parallelism, so a more accurate way to describe the execution flow is that the child nodes _feed into_ their parent nodes. Parent, child and sibling operators _might_ potentially be executing parts of the query in parallel.

Author: I went with "flows into".

| └─TableReader_17           | 1.00     | root      |               | data:StreamAgg_8                |
|   └─StreamAgg_8            | 1.00     | cop[tikv] |               | funcs:count(1)->Column#7        |
|     └─TableFullScan_13     | 10000.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t       | keep order:false, stats:pseudo  |
+----------------------------+----------+-----------+---------------+---------------------------------+
4 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

Similar to `Hash Aggregate`, `Stream Aggregate` is executed in two stages.

- One is on the Coprocessor of TiKV/TiFlash, with the intermediate results of the aggregation function calculated when the table scan operator reads the data.
- The other is at the TiDB layer, with the final result calculated through aggregating the intermediate results of all Coprocessor Tasks.

### Read the `Join` execution plan

The `Join` algorithms in TiDB consist of the following categories:

- [Hash Join](#hash-join-example)
- [Merge Join](#merge-join-example)
- [Index Join (Index Nested Loop Join)](#index-join-example)
- [Index Hash Join (Index Nested Loop Hash Join)](#index-hash-join-example)

> - [Index Merge Join (Index Nested Loop Merge Join)](#index-merge-join-example)

Reviewer: I think this kind of list enables users to easily find specific information. What about doing the same thing in each one of the `EXPLAIN` series (to improve retrievability) and listing this series in `explain-overview.md`?

Some of the `explain-*.md` docs do not give enough context at the beginning and do not introduce what these docs are about (not self-contained). What about telling readers that this is a series of docs and giving them `See also`?

Author: The explain series approaches it from a more logical perspective: joins -> then shows hash/merge/ index join. subqueries -> these are subqueries. I don't think approaching it straight from hash join makes sense.

>     * `keep order:false` shows that the semantics of this query did not require TiKV to return the results in order. If the query were to be modified to require an order (such as `SELECT * FROM t WHERE a = 1 ORDER BY id`), then this would show `keep order:true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * `keep order:false` shows that the semantics of this query did not require TiKV to return the results in order. If the query were to be modified to require an order (such as `SELECT * FROM t WHERE a = 1 ORDER BY id`), then this condition would be `keep order:true`.
```

>     * `stats:pseudo` shows that the estimates shown in `estRows` were based on a heuristic and might not be accurate. TiDB will periodically update statistics as part of a background operation. A manual update can also be performed by running `ANALYZE TABLE t`.

Reviewer 2: It seems that "heuristic" is more commonly used as a verb. Is there an omitted word in "based on a heuristic and"? Or can we just remove that part?
```suggestion
    * `stats:pseudo` shows that the estimates shown in `estRows` might not be accurate. TiDB periodically updates statistics as part of a background operation. A manual update can also be performed by running `ANALYZE TABLE t`.
```
